packages/fetch-batch/README.md, before:

# Batch support for fetch

## Main interface

This allows to batch automatically all requests made within the same tick (aka the same event loop cycle)

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({
      input: `/batch`, 
      init: { method: "POST" }
    });

    const [user1, user2] = await Promise.all([
      client
        .fetch(`/users/1`)
        .then((res) => res.json()),
      client
        .fetch(`/users/2`)
        .then((res) => res.json()),
    ]);

    expect(user1).toEqual({ id: 1, name: "John Doe" });
    expect(user2).toEqual({ id: 2, name: "Jane Doe" });
```

## Always Batch

By default if only one request is pending, the request is sent immediately to the final endpoint without using the batch endpoint.
If you want to always use the batch endpoint, you can use the `alwaysBatch` option.

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({
      input: `/batch`, 
      init: {
        method: "POST",
      },
      alwaysBatch: true
    });
```

## Custom fetch

If the platform you are running does not support fetch, but  library has a 100% compatible one, you can use it instead.
Or if you have a fetch with intrumented telemetry, you can use it as well.

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({
      input: `/batch`, 
      init: {
        method: "POST",
      },
      fetch: myFetch
    });
```

## canceling individual requests

You can cancel requests individually using standard AborController.
If all requests are canceled, the batched request is canceled as well to return as soon as possible.

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({
      input: `/batch`, 
      init: {
        method: "POST",
      }
    });

    const controller = new AbortController();

    const user1 = client
      .fetch(`/users/1`, { signal: controller.signal }).then((res) => res.json());

    const user2 = client
      .fetch(`/users/2`, { signal: controller.signal }).then((res) => res.json());

    // be sure requests are sent
    await sleep(100);
    // abort request 2 afterwards
    controller.abort();

    await expect(user1).rejects.toThrow("Aborted");
    await expect(user2).resolves.toEqual({ id: 2, name: "Jane Doe" });
```

## Behind the scenes

```ts
    // individual requests must target the same host
    const getUser1 = new Request(`http://localhost:${port}/get`, {
      method: "GET",
      headers: new Headers({
        Accept: "application/json; charset=utf-8",
      }),
    });

    // individual requests must target the same host
    const renameUser2 = new Request(`http://localhost:${port}/patch`, {
      method: "PATCH",
      headers: new Headers({
        Accept: "application/json; charset=utf-8",
        "Content-Type": "application/json; charset=utf-8",
      }),
      body: JSON.stringify({
        name: "John Doe",
      }),
    });

    const body = new BatchData();
    body.addRequest(getUser1);
    body.addRequest(renameUser2);

    // use the batch endpoint to send the requests
    const batched = await fetch(`http://localhost:${port}/batch`, {
      method: "POST",
      headers: body.getHeaders({
        'x-custom-header': 'custom value'
      }),
      body: body.stream(),
    }).then((response) => new BatchResponse(response));

    // you can iterate over the responses
    for await (const [contentId,response] of batched) {
      if(contentId === body.getRequestId(getUser1))
        console.log('getUser1 response',await response.json())
      else if(contentId === body.getRequestId(renameUser2))
        console.log('renameUser2 response',await response.json())
    }
    // or directly with request / response matching
    const getUser1Response = await batched.getResponse(body.getRequestId(getUser1));
    console.log('getUser1 response',await getUser1Response.json())
    const renameUser2Response = await batched.getResponse(body.getRequestId(renameUser2));
    console.log('renameUser2 response',await renameUser2Response.json())
```

Commit message:

update readme about custom fetch

packages/fetch-batch/README.md, after:

# Batch support for fetch

## Main interface

This allows to batch automatically all requests made within the same tick (aka the same event loop cycle)

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({
      input: `/batch`, 
      init: { method: "POST" }
    });

    const [user1, user2] = await Promise.all([
      client
        .fetch(`/users/1`)
        .then((res) => res.json()),
      client
        .fetch(`/users/2`)
        .then((res) => res.json()),
    ]);

    expect(user1).toEqual({ id: 1, name: "John Doe" });
    expect(user2).toEqual({ id: 2, name: "Jane Doe" });
```

## Always Batch

By default if only one request is pending, the request is sent immediately to the final endpoint without using the batch endpoint.
If you want to always use the batch endpoint, you can use the `alwaysBatch` option.

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({input: `/batch`, init: { method: "POST" }}, { alwaysBatch: true });
```

## Custom fetch

If the platform you are running does not support fetch, but a library has a 100% compatible one, you should use it as a polyfill.
Batch request assumes there is a fetch implementation that is 100% compatible with the standard one.

You can't just provite a custom fetch because behind the scene batch request uses the following objects :
- Request
- Response
- AbortSignal
- AbortController
- ReadStream 

All of which are part of the standard fetch API.

👉 Custom fetch should only be used for intrumented fetch, A.K.A a fetch overload that adds caching, telemetry, logs, etc.

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({input: `/batch`, init: { method: "POST" }}, { fetch: myFetch });
```

## canceling individual requests

You can cancel requests individually using standard AborController.
If all requests are canceled, the batched request is canceled as well to return as soon as possible.

```ts
    const client = new BatchRequest({
      input: `/batch`, 
      init: {
        method: "POST",
      }
    });

    const controller = new AbortController();

    const user1 = client
      .fetch(`/users/1`, { signal: controller.signal }).then((res) => res.json());

    const user2 = client
      .fetch(`/users/2`, { signal: controller.signal }).then((res) => res.json());

    // be sure requests are sent
    await sleep(100);
    // abort request 2 afterwards
    controller.abort();

    await expect(user1).rejects.toThrow("Aborted");
    await expect(user2).resolves.toEqual({ id: 2, name: "Jane Doe" });
```

## Behind the scenes

```ts
    // individual requests must target the same host
    const getUser1 = new Request(`http://localhost:${port}/get`, {
      method: "GET",
      headers: new Headers({
        Accept: "application/json; charset=utf-8",
      }),
    });

    // individual requests must target the same host
    const renameUser2 = new Request(`http://localhost:${port}/patch`, {
      method: "PATCH",
      headers: new Headers({
        Accept: "application/json; charset=utf-8",
        "Content-Type": "application/json; charset=utf-8",
      }),
      body: JSON.stringify({
        name: "John Doe",
      }),
    });

    const body = new BatchData();
    body.addRequest(getUser1);
    body.addRequest(renameUser2);

    // use the batch endpoint to send the requests
    const batched = await fetch(`http://localhost:${port}/batch`, {
      method: "POST",
      headers: body.getHeaders({
        'x-custom-header': 'custom value'
      }),
      body: body.stream(),
    }).then((response) => new BatchResponse(response));

    // you can iterate over the responses
    for await (const [contentId,response] of batched) {
      if(contentId === body.getRequestId(getUser1))
        console.log('getUser1 response',await response.json())
      else if(contentId === body.getRequestId(renameUser2))
        console.log('renameUser2 response',await response.json())
    }
    // or directly with request / response matching
    const getUser1Response = await batched.getResponse(body.getRequestId(getUser1));
    console.log('getUser1 response',await getUser1Response.json())
    const renameUser2Response = await batched.getResponse(body.getRequestId(renameUser2));
    console.log('renameUser2 response',await renameUser2Response.json())
```
